The Joe Rogan experience.
How did that scene come to play where you were with Hicks and Gracie?
Oh, cuz I, cuz I was, I studied Ike. Oh. When I was in college. Um,
I, I was studying Ike. Um, and then
when I was studying Ike, uh <affirmative> um, hoist grace,
he won the, you know, that was, went into the fighting championship.
That was like the late eighties. Right. 19 93, 93. Okay. Close five years later.
Right. So, but he, I became aware, oh no, that's it. That you're right.
You're right. Cause I was in New York.
I was studying Aikido in New York and <affirmative> and hoist,
Gracie won that first UFC. And like I said, I'm,
I'm six feet tall, but I literally, if I'm in shape, I weigh like 1 55. Right.
And hoist, when he won, that was 1 76, like six feet and under 180. Right. Yep.
And I remember it melted everybody's mind. Yeah.
I mean it melted everybody mind and I, um, so I,
I became interested in them and, and what they were doing, honestly.
Do you, do you know that, um, you know, in the story in there,
in that family's whole crazy story about being, um, you know,
they were Scottish, the, the grandfather was Scottish, right.
And he was like a, a consular, he was a customs,
he was a customs official in Brazil.
And because he had a good relationship with the Japanese console
and helped was with very generous in helping Japanese people get their papers
to come through. And in the Japanese, these console,
I think the story is who,
who knew Ike and jujitsu offered to like teach his sons? Yeah.
It was count.
Meda, right? Yeah. Who came to,
he came to Brazil and taught Carlos and Jian and,
and Helio. Well mostly who are.
The fathers of the ho six and generation and.
Ilios oldest son. I think, I think, uh,
Hoan was the oldest son and he's the one who created the ultimate fighting
championship. But Hickson,
the reason why it was so significant that you had him is that was the champion
of the family. Like undeniably, undisputed, everyone,
everyone throughout jujitsu, this it's very,
very rare at one figure is universally recognized as being the
superior product of jujitsu. And that was Hickson. Yeah. You.
I, yeah. If you followed that stuff at all, you kind of yes.
Heard that breakdown of it and yeah, I thought I thought a part of the story,
I think Hickson told me when we were in Rio.
I think what he said to me was that the reason Gracie jujitsu
became its particular derivation and its particular kind of things
that allowed hoist to do so well was because their father
was smaller than his brothers that's Ilio. Right. And he, and because,
and they were all bigger and because he was smaller, he adapted yes.
You know,
he adapted the style to work for a smaller person against a bigger person. Yes,
obviously. And um, and then that kind of like reached its,
its pinnacle with hoist winning that yes. That tournament, which, which,
which this, this gets down in the weeds for people who aren't into this stuff.
But the, but it was, I mean that was that you talk about these things,
the cracking through moment, right? Yes. That was a cracking through moment.
It was like, wait a minute, a guy,
his size just literally won in all form, all eyes tournament.
Like how is that possible? You know what I mean? And it was like,
it was like jaw hits floor. And to me,
what was really interesting was I was really little,
all the way until literally the end of high school. I was very small.
I grew a lot, um, in my, like when I was like 17,
but I was really interested in Japan and I was interested in martial arts and
you know, James claves show gun, like not mm-hmm <affirmative>, you know? And,
um, and I would take, I, I took like a karate class and it scared me. I,
it was people if they were bigger and faster, it was just scary.
If you were little, it was like, I can't,
it doesn't matter if I can do these combos or whatever in
truth. I'm terrified of anybody bigger than me.
And I don't feel that this is teaching me anything that I would have the
confidence to, to use, to defend myself. Right. That's how I felt as a kid. Mm.
And when I, when I bumped into Aiki, I,
it completely changed my mind. The guy,
there was an incredible teacher in new Haven when I was in college and he was
small. He was like, ho you know, maybe smaller than hoist grace or whatever.
And the guy was unbelievably like potent,
like just in one of the most potent teachers in anything I ever
had. I was riveted by this guy. And, um, and, uh,
and it kind of started to make me believe that with grab grappling and
locking, which there's a lot of,
there's a lot of jujitsu in Aikido mm-hmm <affirmative>. And I was sort of like,
I was fascinated. I started feeling like this, this,
this makes me feel like I, it's not like kicking someone's at all.
It's just more like, I feel more empowered. I feel,
I feel helpless able to handle an authentic situation. Yes. Um,
which is just mentally empowering more than like, I want to get into scraps.
Right. And it was just kind of amazing. It's like having a secret in a way,
like, whoa,
there's a secret to a much smaller person being able to lever a much bigger
person. And then that thing happened with the gray season.
It was sort of like the whole thing cracked open. It was like this,
it was like proof. Yes. In a way, you know? And,
and if you were interested in that stuff, it was an incredible moment.
But because my interest in that for years when we went to Rio
Rio, and I had been working on the script of that movie and stuff,
and I was like,
I was really interested in this idea that banner is,
is desperate for control. Right. That he desperately,
desperately needs to control his heart rate, his breathing.
That it's a massive liability in his mind if he can't control his
emotions and his adrenaline. And I was like, well, who in the world?
And, and I I'd seen the videos of Hicks. I'd never met him or any of them,
but I'd seen the videos of him doing the, um, amazing stuff with his stomach.
Yeah. The yoga. Yeah. And the breathing, fire breath. And I was like, and I,
I just was like, we have to, and, and everyone was like, who's that? I was like,
<laugh>. I was like, I was like, Phyllis steins. You're a, all Phyllis steins.
Like I was like, and I was like,
find me Hicks and Gracie and ask him if he'll do a scene with me in the movie
being the guy who's training banner to like calm himself.
And he was there and he, and he did it with us and it was like, I was like,
yeah.
There it is right here. Yeah. Yeah. When I saw this in the movie, I was,
oh. Yeah. Like what a smart.
Move. Yeah. And I was like,
I was, I was like, yeah, see, I got, I forgot this. Holy crap.
I haven't looked at this in a long time. He's look how charismatic he is.
He's amazing. I mean, the guy, the guy could have been like Charles Bronson,
a hundred percent.
Like a movie star. Did you ever choke the documentary? Yeah.
One of the greatest documentaries in, in, in history it's like pumping.
Absolutely. Yeah, absolutely. For martial arts and it, it, uh,
it details Hickson's, uh, journeys to Japan to fight in Japan valley Tudo,
which was around 94,
which is right after his brother had won the ultimate fighting championship.
Mm-hmm <affirmative>.
And the story was that if his other lost Hickson was going in,
like the idea was like, well, bring in hoist because it's more impressive.
He's a smaller man. He's not physically imposing.
Whereas Hickson in that video there, he was older when he was young, he was,
you know, very fit and it was big into yoga and physical fitness.
And he had the strongest body of all the grace mm-hmm <affirmative> he's like,
he looked very formidable <affirmative> whereas hoist looked unassuming and it
was a,
more of an advertisement of jujitsu if hoist could beat everybody and hoist
wound up doing. But if at any reason, right.
If they needed to bring in the big gun <laugh> it was gonna be Hickson and,
and Hoy always talked about it. Like Hickson could tap him left and right.
And everybody was like, that doesn't even make sense. Right.
Hoist is the ultimate fighting champion. Yeah. He's the guy,
but his brother would just run right through him. He'd run. Right.
He would run right through everybody. He would,
they would have a line of black belts and they,
they would all wait for their turn to get tapped and they would roll with
Hickson. And he would just dismantle everybody,
people that thought they understood jujitsu it's.
So there there's so many levels and layers to jujitsu that E even though it
looks like, what is the difference is guy's doing an arm bar,
you're doing an arm bar there's specifics in the intricate aspects of the
positions that Hickson understood that they just didn't understand.
And then on top of that,
he had much greater control of his body because of his yoga background.
Mm-hmm <affirmative>, I mean, he, he became obsessed with yoga and breathing.
Yeah. Some breathing and, and something called gymnast, uh, natural,
which was like a, a style of movement that was like,
sort of like Vinyasa yoga with all these like flowing postures,
but also with a bunch of like, almost like animal movements to it too.
And it was a very physically demanding thing.
And he became a outstanding at that as well. Right. Sorry,
but it's, uh, people don't from the outside,
when you start talking about things like jujitsu and ultimate fighting,
you think of like this brutal, violent,
but it's an intellectual pursuit and it's a spiritual pursuit because to be the
person that can overcome all of the obstacles,
you have to have incredible control of your,
and your thought processes and your understanding of who you are.
And that I think is one of the things that separated Hickson from everybody I do
too.